* [Chapter 1: Technologies as Forms of Life](#chapter-1-technologies-as-forms-of-life)
* [Chapter 3: Techné and Politeia](#chapter-3-techné-and-politeia)

### Chapter 1: Technologies as Forms of Life

#### *Technological Somnambulism*
Why is it that the philosophy of technology has never really gotten under way? Why has a culture so firmly based upon countless sophisticated instruments, techniques, and systems remained so steadfast in its reluctance to examine its own foundations? Much of the answer can be found in the astonishing hold the idea of 'progress' has exercised on social thought during the industrial age. In the twentieth century it is usually taken for granted that the only reliable sources for improving the human condition stem from new machines, techniques, and chemicals. Even the recurring environmental and social ills that have already accompanied technological advancement have rarely dented this faith. It is still a prerequisite that the person running for public office swear his or her unflinching confidence in a positive link between technical development and human well-being and affirm that the next wave of innovations will surely be our salvation

According to conventional views, the human relationship to technical things is too obvious to merit serious reflection. The deceptively reasonable notion that we have inherited from much earlier and less complicated times divides the range of possible concerns about technology into two basic categories: making and use. In the first of these our attention is drawn to the matter of 'how things work' and of 'making things work.' We tend to think that this is a fascination of certain people in certain occupations, but not for anyone else. 'How things work' is the domain of inventors, technicians, engineers, repairmen, and the like who prepare artificial aids to human activity and keep them in good working order. Those not directly involved in the various spheres of 'making' are thought to have little interest in or need to know about the materials, principles, or procedures found in those spheres.

What the others do care about, however, are tools and uses. This is understood to be a straightforward matter. Once things have been made, we interact with them on occasion to achieve specific purposes. One picks up a tool, uses it, and puts it down. One picks up a telephone, talks on it, and then does not use it for a time. A person gets on an airplane, flies from point A to point B, then gets off. The proper interpretation of the meaning of technology in the mode of use seems to be nothing more complicated than an occasional, limited, and nonproblematic interaction.

The language of the notion of 'use' also includes standard terms that enable us to interpret technologies in a range of moral contexts. Tools can be 'used well or poorly' and for 'good or bad purposes'; I can use my knife to slice a loaf of bread or to stab the next person that walks by. Because technological objects and processes have a promiscuous utility, they are taken to be fundamentally neutral as regards their moral standing.

The conventional idea of what technology is and what it means, an idea powerfully reinforced by familiar terms used in everyday language, needs to be overcome if a critical philosophy of technology is to move ahead. The crucial weakness of the conventional idea is that it disregards the many ways in which technologies provide structure for human activity. Since, according to accepted wisdom, patterns that take shape in the sphere of 'making' are of interest to practitioners alone, and since the very essence of 'use' is its occasional, innocuous, nonstructuring occurrence, any further questioning seems irrelevant.

If the experience modern society shows us anything, however, it is that technologies are not merely aids to human activity, but also powerful forces acting to reshape that activity and its meaning. The introduction of a robot to an industrial workplace not only increases productivity, but often radically changes the process of production, redefining what 'work' means in that setting. When a sophisticated new technique or instrument is adopted in medical practice, it transforms not only what doctors do, but also the ways people think about health, sickness, and medical care. Widespread alterations of this kind in techniques of communication, transportation, manufacturing, agriculture, and the like are largely what distinguishes our times from early periods of human history. The kinds of things we are apt to see as 'mere' technological entities become much more interesting and problematic if we begin to observe how broadly they are involved in conditions of social and moral life.

It seems characteristic of our culture's involvement with technology that we are seldom inclined to examine, discuss, or judge pending innovations with broad, keen awareness of what those changes mean. In the technical realm we repeatedly enter into a series of social contracts, the terms of which are revealed only after signing.

It may seem that the view I am suggesting is that of technological determinism: the idea that technological innovation is the basic cause of changes in society and that human beings have little choice other than to sit back and watch this ineluctable process unfold. But the concept of determinism is much too strong, far too sweeping in its implications to provide an adequate theory. It does little justice to the genuine choices that arise, in both principle and practice, in the course of technical and social transformation. Being saddled with it is like attempting to describe all instances of sexual intercourse based only on the concept of rape. A more revealing notion, in my view, is that of technological somnambulism. For the interesting puzzle in our times is that we so willingly sleepwalk through the process of reconstituting the conditions of human existence.

#### *Beyond Impacts and Side Effects*
Social scientists have tried to awaken the sleeper by developing methods of technology assessment. The strength of these methods is that they shed light on phenomena that were previously overlooked. But an unfortunate shortcoming of technology assessment is that it tends to see technological change as a 'cause' and everything that follows as an 'effect' or 'impact.' The role of the researcher is to identify, observe, and explain these effects. This approach assumes that the causes have already occurred or are bound to do so in the normal course of events. Social research boldly enters the scene to study the 'consequences' of the change. After the bulldozer has rolled over us, we can pick ourselves up and carefully measure the treadmarks. Such is the impotent mission of technological 'impact' assessment.

A somewhat more farsighted version of technology assessment is sometimes used to predict which changes are likely to happen, the 'social impacts of computerization' for example. With these forecasts at its disposal, society is, presumably, better able to chart its course. But, once again, the attitude in which the predictions are offered usually suggests that the 'impacts' are going to happen in any case. Assertions of the sort 'Computerization will bring about a revolution in the way we educate children' carry the strong implication that those who will experience the change are obliged simply to endure it. Humans must adapt. That is their destiny. There is no tampering with the source of change, and only minor modifications are possible at the point of impact (perhaps some slight changes in the fashion contour of this year's treadmarks).

But we have already begun to notice another view of technological development, one that transcends the empirical and moral shortcomings of cause-and-effect models. It begins with the recognition that as technologies are being built and put to use, significant alterations in patterns of human activity and human institutions are already taking place. New worlds are being made. There is nothing 'secondary' about this phenomenon. It is, in fact, the most important accomplishment of any new technology. The construction of a technical system that involves human beings as operating parts brings a reconstruction of social roles and relationships. Often this is a result of a new system's own operating requirements: it simply will not work unless human behavior changes to suit its form and process. Hence, the very act of using the kinds of machines, techniques, and systems available to us generates patterns of activities and expectations that soon become 'second nature.' We do not indeed 'use' telephones, automobiles, electric lights, and computers in the conventional sense of picking them up and putting them down. But our world soon becomes one in which telephony, automobility, electric lighting, and computing are forms of life in the most powerful sense: life would scarcely be thinkable without them.

My choice of the term 'forms of life' in this context derives from Ludwig Wittgenstein's elaboration of that concept in Philosophical Investigations. In his later writing Wittgenstein sought to overcome an extremely narrow view of the structure of language then popular among philosophers, a view that held language to be primarily a matter of naming things and events. Pointing to the richness and multiplicity of the kinds of expression or 'language games' that are a part of everyday speech, Wittgenstein argued that 'the speaking of language is a part of an activity, or of a form of life.' He gave a variety of examples--the giving of orders, speculating about events, guessing riddles, making up stories, forming and testing hypotheses, and so forth--to indicate the wide range of language games involved in various 'forms of life.' Whether he meant to suggest that these are patterns that occur naturally to all human beings or that they are primarily cultural conventions that can change with time and setting is a question open to dispute. For the purposes here, what matters is not the ultimate philosophical status of Wittgenstein's concept but its suggestiveness in helping us to overcome another widespread and extremely narrow conception: our normal understanding of the meaning of technology in human life.

As they become woven into the texture of everyday existence, the devices, techniques, and systems we adopt shed their tool-like qualities to become part of our very humanity. In an important sense we become the beings who work on assembly lines, who talk on telephones, who do our figuring on pocket calculators, who eat processed foods, who clean our homes with powerful chemicals. Of course, working, talking, figuring, eating, cleaning, and such things have been parts of human activity for a very long time. But technological innovations can radically alter these common patterns and on occasion generate entirely new ones, often with surprising results.

The role television plays in our society offers some poignant examples. None of those who worked to perfect the technology of television in its early years and few of those who brought television sets into their homes ever intended the device to be employed as the universal babysitter. That, however, has become one of televisions' most common functions in the modern home. Similarly, if anyone in the 1930s had predicted people would eventually be watching seven hours of television each day, the forecast would have been laughed away as absurd. But recent surveys indicate that we Americans do spend that much time, roughly one-third of our lives, staring at the tube. Those who wish to reassert freedom of choice in the matter sometimes observe, 'You can always turn off your TV.' In a trivial sense this is true. At least for the time being the on/off button is still included as standard equipment on most sets (perhaps someday it will become optional). But given how central television has become to the content of everyday life, how it has become the accustomed topic of conversation in workplaces, schools, and other social gatherings, it is apparent that television is a phenomenon that, in the larger sense, cannot be 'turned off' at all. Deeply insinuated into people's perceptions, thoughts, and behavior, it has become an indelible part of modern culture.

Most changes in the content of everyday life brought on by technology can be recognized as versions of earlier patterns. Parents have always had to entertain and instruct children and to find ways of keeping the little ones out of their hair. Having youngsters watch several hours of television cartoons is, in one way of looking at the matter, merely a new method for handling this age-old task, although the 'merely' is of no small significance. It is important to ask, Where if at all, have modern technologies added fundamentally new activities to the range of things human beings do? Where and how have innovations in science and technology begun to alter the very conditions of life itself? Is computer programming only a powerful recombination of forms of life known for ages--doing mathematics, listening, sorting, planning, organizing, etc.--or is it something unprecedented? Is industrialized agribusiness simply a renovation of older ways of farming, or does it amount to an entirely new phenomenon?

On the whole, most of the transformations that occur in the wake of technological innovation are actually variations of very old patterns. Wittgenstein's philosophically conservative maxim, 'What has to be accepted, the given, is--so one could say--forms of life' could well be the guiding rule of a phenomenology of technical practice. For instance, asking a question and awaiting an answer, a form of interaction we all know well, is much the same activity whether it is a person we are confronting or a computer. There are, of course, significant differences between persons and computers (although it is fashionable in some circles to ignore them). Forms of life that we mastered before the coming of the computer shape our expectations as we begin to use the instrument. One strategy of software design, therefore, tries to 'humanize' the computers by having them say 'Hello' when the user logs in or having them respond with witty remarks when a person makes an error. We carry with us highly anticipations about entities that appear to participate, if only minimally, in forms of life and associated language games that are parts of human culture. Those anticipations provide much of the persuasive power of those who prematurely claim great advances in 'artificial intelligence' based on narrow but impressive demonstrations of computer performance. But then children have always fantasized that their dolls were alive and talking.

The view of technologies as forms of life I am proposing has its clearest beginnings in the writings of Karl Marx. In Part I of The German Ideology, Marx and Engels explain the relationship of human individuality and material conditions of production as follows: 'The way in which men produce their means of subsistence depends first of all on the nature of the means of subsistence they actually find in existence and have to reproduce. The mode of production must not be considered simply as being the reproduction of the physical existence of the individuals. Rather it is a definite form of expressing their life, a definite mode of life on their part. As individuals express their life, so they are.'

Marx's concept of production here is a very broad and suggestive one. It reveals the total inadequacy of any interpretation that finds social change a mere 'side effect' or 'impact' of technological innovation. While he clearly points to means of production that sustain life in an immediate, physical sense, Marx's view extends to a general understanding of human development in a world of diverse natural resources, tools, machines, products, and social relations. The notion is clearly not one of occasional human interaction with devices and material conditions that leave individuals unaffected. By changing the shape of material things, Marx observes, we also change ourselves. In this process human beings do not stand at the mercy of a great deterministic press punch that cranks out precisely tailored persons at a certain rate during a given historical period. Instead, the situation Marx describes is one in which individuals are actively involved in the daily creation and recreation, production and reproduction of the world in which they live. Thus, as they employ tools and techniques, work in social labor arrangements, make and consume products, and adapt their behavior to the material conditions they encounter in their natural and artificial environment, individuals realize possibilities for human existence that are inaccessible in more primitive modes of production.

Marx expands upon this idea in 'The Chapter on Capital' in the Grundrisse. The development of forces of production in history, he argues, holds the promise of the development of a many-sided individuality in human beings. Capital's unlimited pursuit of wealth leads it to develop the productive powers of labor to a state 'where the possession and preservation of general wealth require a lesser labour time of society as a whole, and where the labouring society relates scientifically to the process of its progressive reproduction, its reproduction in constantly greater abundance.' This movement toward a general form of wealth 'creates the material elements for the development of the rich individuality which is all-sided in its production as in its consumption, and whose labour also therefore appears no longer as labour, but as the full development of activity itself.'

If one has access to tools and materials of woodworking, a person can develop the human qualities found in the activities of carpentry. If one is able to employ the instruments and techniques of music making, one can become (in that aspect of one's life) a musician. Marx's ideal here, a variety of materialist humanism, anticipates that in a properly structured society under modern conditions of production, people would engage in a very wide range of activities that enrich their individuality along many dimensions. It is that promise which, he argues, the institutions of capitalism thwart and cripple.

As applied to an understanding of technology, the philosophies of Marx and Wittgenstein direct our attention to the fabric of everyday existence. Wittgenstein points to a vast multiplicity of cultural practices that comprise our common world. Asking us to notice 'what we say when,' his approach can help us recognize the way language reflects the content of technical practice. It makes sense to ask, for example, how the adoption of digital computers might alter the way people think of their own faculties and activities. If Wittgenstein is correct, we would expect that changes of this kind would appear, sooner or later, in the language people use to talk about themselves. Indeed, it has now become commonplace to hear people say 'I need to access your data.' 'I'm not programmed for that.' 'We must improve our interface.' 'The mind is the best computer we have.'

Marx, on the other hand, recommends that we see the actions and intentions of everyday life within an enormous tapestry of historical developments. On occasion, as in the chapter on 'Machinery and Large-Scale Industry' in Capital, his mode of interpretation also includes a place for a more microscopic treatment of specific technologies in human experience. But on the whole his theory seeks to explain very large patterns, especially relationships between different social classes, that unfold at each stage in the history of material production. These developments set the stage for people's ability to survive and express themselves, for their ways of being human

#### *Return to Making*
To invoke Wittgenstein and Marx in this context, however, is not to suggest that either one or both provide a sufficient basis for a critical philosophy of technology. Proposing an attitude in which forms of life must be accepted as 'the given,' Wittgenstein decides that philosophy 'leaves everything as it is.' Although some Wittgensteinians are eager to point out that this position does not necessarily commit the philosopher to conservatism in an economic or political sense, it does seem that as applied to the study of forms of life in the realm of technology, Wittgenstein leaves us with little more than a passive traditionalism. If one hopes to interpret technological phenomena in a way that suggests positive judgments and actions, Wittgensteinian philosophy leaves much to be desired.

In a much different way Marx and Marxism contain the potential for an equally woeful passivity. This mode of understanding places its hope in historical tendencies that promise human emancipation at some point. As forces of production and social relations of production develop and as the proletariat makes its way toward revolution, Marx and his orthodox followers are willing to allow capitalist technology, for example, the factory system, to develop to its farthest extent. Marx and Engels scoffed at the utopians, anarchists, and romantic critics of industrialism who thought it possible to make moral and political judgments about the course a technological society ought to take and to influence that path through the application of philosophical principles. Following this lead, most Marxists have believed that while capitalism is a target to be attacked, technological expansion is entirely good in itself, something to be encouraged without reservation. In its own way, then, Marxist theory upholds an attitude as nearly lethargic as the Wittgenstein decision to 'leave everything as it is.' The famous eleventh thesis on Feuerbach--'The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point, however, is to change it'--conceals an important qualification: that judgment, action, and change are ultimately products of history. In its view of technological development Marxism anticipates a history of rapidly evolving material productivity, an inevitable course of events in which attempts to propose moral and political limits have no place. When socialism replaces capitalism, so the promise goes, the machine will finally move into high gear, presumably releasing humankind from its age-old miseries.

Whatever their shortcomings, however, the philosophies of Marx and Wittgenstein share a fruitful insight: the observation that social activity is an ongoing process of world-making. Throughout their lives people come together to renew the fabric of relationships, transactions, and meanings that sustain their common existence. Indeed, if they did not engage in this continuing activity of material and social production, the human world would literally fall apart. All social roles and frameworks--from the most rewarding to the most oppressive--must somehow be restored an reproduced with the rise of the sun each day.

From this point of view, the important question about technology becomes, As we 'make things work,' what kind of world are we making? This suggests that we pay attention not only to the making of physical instruments and processes, although that certainly remains important, but also to the production of psychological, social, and political conditions as a part of any significant technical change. Are we going to design and build circumstances that enlarge possibilities for growth in human freedom, sociability, intelligence, creativity, and self-government? Or are we headed in an altogether different direction?

### Chapter 3: Techné and Politeia


#### *The Technical Constitution of Society*
1. Without anyone having explicitly chosen it, dependency upon highly centralized organizations has gradually become a dominant social form.
1. Justified by impressive economies of scale and, economies or not, always an expression of the power that accrues to very large organizations, gigantism has become an accustomed feature in the material and social settings of everyday life.
1. Far from being a place of democratic freedom, the reality of the workplace tends to be undisguisedly authoritarian.
1. It is not merely that useful devices and techniques of earlier periods have been rendered extinct, but also that patterns of social existence and individual experience that employed these tools have vanished as living realities.
1. Human needs, markets, and political institutions that might regulate technology-based systems are often subject to manipulation by those very systems.
