* Part I: The Wasteland within and about Us
  * [Chapter 3: Waking Up, Being Real: The Mindscape of Single Vision](#chapter-3-waking-up-being-real-the-mindscape-of-single-vision)
  
* Part II: Single Vision and Newton's Sleep: The Strange Interplay of Objectivity and Alienation
  * [Chapter 4: The Sin of Idolatry](#chapter-4-the-sin-of-idolatry)
  * [Chapter 5: A Dead Man's Eyes](#chapter-5-a-dead-mans-eyes)

### Chapter 3: Waking Up, Being Real: The Mindscape of Single Vision

#### *Dark Mind and Dream Thieving*
Suppose I were to ask that you now pause and try to recollect all you can of what you dreamed last night. It is a safe assumption that few of you could salvage more than some faded fragments of your dreams. You might even be convinced that you did not dream at all. But you did, Contemporary sleep research finds that all of us dream prodigiously each night and give the fact away by the fluttering of our eyeballs beneath their sleeping lids. Last night, as on all the nights of your life, you dreamed much and magnificently, moving in an alternative reality of your own invention whose imaginative magnitude (for all you know) may have rivaled the creations of Homer and Shakespeare. Yet there are many people who would insist that their nights were wholly dreamless, if there did not exist behavioral evidence--electronically calibrated and recorded--to show them otherwise. Strange, is it not, that even in such matters, we should need to invoke the authority of experts...as if our very dreams were not our own?

As for the abyss which lies beyond the edge of dreams, that interlude of the dark mind we call sleep--how do you look back upon it now? As a succession of empty holes punctuating your life with lost time? Do you give it any thought at all, this daily retreat to oblivion? Perhaps you assume "simply"--that you pass through this eclipse of ordinary consciousness only because of some obvious form of physcal fatigue. If that were so, then sleep could well be viewed as a bothersome necessity imposed by the limitations of our organism, a flaw we must surely repair when we know better how to manipulate the chemistry of the body. There are those in the advance guard of medical research who predict the even with no little enthusiasm... and technicians too who eagerly anticipate the abolition of night by way of orbiting space-mirrors. The prospec has been called "an all-out war on sleep." Not until it is eliminated, then, can we expect the utopia of round-the-clock, non-stop consumption and active leisure.

The common assumption: we sleep because we grow tired. But in what way "tired"? In the muscles... in the blood... in the nerves... Yes, the fatigue makes itself felt there physiologically. But why will simple immobility and relaxation not do to rest us? Why the radial change of consciousness? For sleep is not mere relaxation; not mere *un*-consciousness either, but a rich dream life that spirals down through ever deeper levels of the dark mind. How deep? James Joyce in his *Finnegans Wake*, leads us across a dreamscape that reaches to the dark running river of collective remembrance. Is that perhaps what lies waiting in those depths of tranquility that will not yield the sleep researcher's electrodes the least behavioral twitch? If that were so, then what should we make of this irrepressible need for sleep? Perhaps that is the claim upon us of another dimension of experience--a longing for alternative consciousness built into the circadian rhythm of all animal life. Seen in this light, sleep might well be the most rewarding of all "natural highs," and the most universal--compared to which the psychedelic drugs bring only a poor substitute. For what if Joyce was right? (And always best to take poets more seriously than laboratory psychologists in such matters.) What if, without resort to artificial technique, the dark mind broadens of its own accord into universality and we re-enact each night the mythical identities of man?

What if...? A question that cannot expect an answer. In what spirit can I raise the point with you but as an interesting speculation? The adventures of the dark mind are among the most commonplace facts of daily life. Yet no sooner do we probe their meaning than we find ourselves brought to a halt at the utmost limits of awareness; and nothing I can say here will take you across that shadowy frontier. Let the fact take hold before you read further: by no act of will no matter how strenuous, can you now reclaim from all your life more than a few scraps of your dreams. You *cannot*. If I were to suggest that in your dreams miracles of self-discovery have taken place, that in the ocean bottoms of sleep you have found your way to sacred ground... if I were to submit that this had happened to you--to *you*, last night--you would be incapable of verifying or refuting the suggestion. That is what it means to be at the boundaries of consciousness--or rather of *orthodox* consciousness. Here, in part, is what our alienated normality requires of you, this scornful neglect of the dark mind which leaves you a stranger to so much of your own experience, and which, even now, may be counseling you to pay these trivial matters no attention... these senseless dreams... this vaccum of existence called sleep.

You might, with some philosophical sophistication, contend at this point that the discussion is meaningless, since it requires of you an awareness of what is naturally unconscious and so unverifiable in principle. But in fact what I suggest is no more than the possibility of amnesia: episodic, habitual amnesia. To tell an amnesiac dancer who had lost his talents that he once danced like a god would hardly be meaningless, though the artist could not for the life of him recall more than fleeting images of his forgotten achievements. The mad Nijinsky was, in his catatonic later years, just this sort of tragic figure. Yet *we* would know what lay hidden from remembrance in the shadow of the artist's life. Just so, there are those who know what our collective amnesia conceals. We call them "mystics" and I shall have more to say of their role before this chapter ends.

It may be extremely difficult for most of us to draw back the amnesiac curtain that parts us from the bulk of our dreams. But with a little care, it is at least possible to brighten our awareness of the repressive act that daily drives the dark mind into unconsciousness. In the normal course of things, all of us come awake by way of dream thieving, a psychic discipline of great severity. Each morning, systematically but quite subliminally, we steal from ourselves and sequester every remnant of our prewaking awareness. We have all learned to carry out this exercise in self-impoverishment with a precise and automatic thoroughness. The alarm rings, and instantaneously an axe falls across the continuum of consciousness, sharply dividing awake from asleep. Wakefulness points forward into the bright light of the *real* world: the world of office buildings, factory floors, classrooms, city streets, shopping centers, yesterday's worries, this morning's news. Responsibility, ambition, decision are upon us at once, monopolizing our attention. While behind us, dotted here and there with dream images like failing embers, the dark mind is fast becoming an undifferentiated waste where we discern nothing that resembles knowledge or achievement. et cultivate even a small measure of psychic plasticity, and it becomes possible to prolong the process of waking, at least to a degree, to feel how pre-emptorily the waking mind deals with the dark mind. Rapidly, efficiently, the dreams are dispersed from memory and our sharply outlined, compacted, daytime identity is precipitated out of the shape-shifting self we were in our sleep, a creature of cloud, a creature of water. All within moments. An hour after we awake, for most of us the dreams are gone and today has blended into yesterday without interruption or distraction.

It requries a nimble attentiveness during just that first crucial interval of the morning--but if the effort is successful, one gains from it a sense of how reluctantly the dark mind slides away from us... as if it had more to tell, as if it were not yet ready to surrender our attention and would call us back. And what we then take away into the waking world can be a distressing sense of mutilation.

But here is an obious question. Do not all people wake to deal with the dark mind as we do? The answer is no. It is among the marked characteristics of all prescientific cultures that the dream life is treated with great, but commonplace respect and that oneirologists are given prominent status. Alfred Kroeber, the anthropologist, once cited this as a key measure of the "backwardness" of primitive people. "To them," he remakred, "a child or a hawk or a stone seen or heard in a certain kind of dream or trance is much more important than a physical child or hawk or stone that one can touch or handle, because it is the possible source of much more power... Certain things we classify as unreal, the primitive consideres super-real--with the result that his world seems 'surrealistically' fantastic to us." In some primitive cultures, like that of the Senoi of Malaya, dream exploration is a highly sophisticated skill and a form of pedagogy; indeed, Senoi oneirics makes our own poor psychology of dreams seem sadly immature by comparison. For the American Plains Indians, the more impressive dream visions of a gifted medicine man like the Sioux Black Elk could become the occasion for magnificent tribal ceremonials in which the dream was re-enacted in careful detail, a striking anticipation of what the Gestalt psychotherapist Frederick Perls has, in our own time, recreated as "existential dream interpretation."

In most high civilizations of the past, dream meanings were granted a similarly high status. In the yoga tradition of India, students were counseled to watch for the appearance of great teaching masters who would come in dreams to instruct them. Dreamless sleep was also accorded a special dignity as the unconscious version of the supreme illumination (*samadhi*). In effect, the yogi's objective was to achieve a form of wakefulness within the sleeping state--a condition for which our culture cannot find words remotely appropriate. Perhaps we skeptically reject the claim that architecture can be thus dreamed up, but the claim itself is significat. The dream was accepted as an indisputable principle of authority. The gods made themselves known in dreams, and even crowned heads would be foolish not to heed them. One need only recall how young Joseph made his way to the top of Egyptian political life and why it was that Nebuchadnezzar abased himself before Daniel and showered him with favors.

We in the contemporary west may wake each morning to cast out our sleep and dream experience like so much rubbish. But that is an almost freakish act of alienation. Only western society--and especially in the modern era--has been quite so prodigal in dealing with what is, even by the fictitious measure of our mechanical clocks, a major portion of our lives. And what becomes of those who break under the strain of such a spendthrift sanity--for many do? Does not our psychiatry return them to their dreamlife to recover a portion of what they have squandered? Yet, ironically, "normal" men and women rise every morning of their adult lives to dose themselves on caffeinated drinks whose purpose is to expunge their dream experience. Many are drien by the demands of their work to intensify the waking state and prolong it well into the night by a punishing regimen of pep pills and "uppers." The business life and politics of the artificial enviornment are transacted exclusively by men and women in just such a condition of exaggerated alertness. Sad victims of a grueling addiction--yet they enjoy high regard for being practical, productive, "wide awake."

It is no mere coincidence that coffee, tea, and chocolate--the repertory of stimulatn beverages to which western society has become habituated and without which the compulsive wakefulness of our society simultaneously with the scientific revolution. Lewis Feuer has suggested (though in a different context) that modern science takes its origin from the coffeehouses of seventeenth-century England. There is an important truth hidden in that fact. Caffeine has been the chemical adjunct of one of the most dramatic transformations of consciousness the human race has experienced. It has helped press the razor-sharp edge of wakefulness mercilessly against the mind; still today, only the pain of that blade will serve to convince most of us that we are alive and awake in the real world.

Since Freud, psychotherapy has been much concerned with the dream's sysmbolic vocabulary. But even Freud, though he was daring enough to take dreams seriously in an era of hyper-realism, confined himself to examining how repression shapes a few motifs of the dreaming mind: the sexual and aggressive elements which are among the most easily recoverable. Similarly, Jung, in his tudy of the archetypal unconscious, was primarily interested in the *contents* of dreams, more so than in the dream as a peculiar medium of experience. True enough, we forbiddenly make love and war in our dreams; we ay also delve to the collective, archetypal level sof the psyche. But *whatever* it taken up by the dark mind is molded by the dream as a freely imaginative medium respecting no conventional order of space, time, identity, or logic. What is most important about the dream is the way it perversely makes sport of such "realities" as if they did not much matter, thus indulging in what is, for the waking mind, an unpardonable heresy.

And so it is a heresy. Let me at this point suggest only briefly what I believe the offense is for which are dreams are censored--and then return to the subject in a later chapter. Dreaming begins with the free play of metaphorical fantasy--that fascination with the infinite plsticity of things and events which Joyce sought to capture by way of his "portmanteau" puns. In dreams, all durability, solidity, logical coherence is mischievously defied. By way of such imaginative [lay, we surround ourselves with an environment of shifting symbolic surfaces; and at last, as the dream deepens, we move toward the dramatized participation of those symbols. This is so very singular and important a mode of experience that modern psychology, despite its scientific pretnsions, has been forced to treat dreams in a strikingly special way. In our wakeful awareness, most of us in the modern west quite automatically address the world about us with the questions "How does it work?"; "What caused it?" But when we confront our dreams, such questions have no satisfying sense to them. Instead, we put a question of an entirely different order, one which our ancestors habitually asked of their experience as a whole, awake or dreaming. We ask, "*What does it mean?*" For we at once recognize in our dreams a symbolic presence which makes what is before us other and more than it seems.

Here is a mode of experience that returns to us in waking life as art--especially poetry, drama, and the visual arts. In what artists lay before us there is the residue of a reality we first learned in sleep. As Walter Abell has observed, artists are "dreamers of the collective dream." In the supreme images of art, as in our dreams, there is the same sense of a world bordering on transparency: images, situations, people, adventures that want to reveal more than lies on the surface of things. Is that not what we mean when we call something "dreamlike"... that there is an eerie *unreality* to the appearances immediately before us? So in our dreams, the reality is not in the appeareances, but behind them. The dream invites us *into* the experience, would have us *penetrate*, enter, be lost, be still, and at last (here is the heart of it) annihilate time. And we *do* enter, and we *do* become lost, and time *does* stop... and that might be the knowledge of eternity. But for us the experience is censored. We recall it only as the blank stupor called sleep, because the waking mind's time is, ideally and of necessity in our artificial environment, clock time and will not be made plastic or suffer annihilation. It is the physicist's time we march to, time as time woudl be if there were no living thing to tranform existence into experience; time such as machines can measure out in the lockstep of equal and abstract measures. The most threatening heresy of the dark mind lies precisely in this: that it brings us to the still center of time's axis, where the turning wheel no longer turns.

So then, it is not any particular dream content that is most significantly repressed by the waking mind, but *dreaming itself* as an uncompromised, essentially poetic mode of experiencing. It is just this lawless defiance of literalness and necessity that the intolerant waking mind rejects; for here is the dark mind thrusting forward a rival Reality Principle, and, int eh course of each night's adventures, gaining our acquiescence. Psychiatry has learned to salvage this and that from the rich contents of the dream. But until it integrates the dream as medium of experience into our lives, it has not reconciled the antagonism that divides the soul most radically, that between the contending realities of the waking and dark minds.

### Chapter 4: The Sin of Idolatry

#### *Idolatry and Damnation*
It is only after Protestant iconoclasm has at last rooted sacramental perception out of our culture that we arrive, for the first time in history, at a condition of true idolatry. All knowledge becomes a single-visioned knowledge of mere objects, an objective knowledge from which, we feel certain, mastery, security, affluence flow. Again the psychic metaphors tell the story. Nature as excrement means money means power. These are tempting prizes, sufficient to induce non-Protestants to join the iconoclast cause. Ours is indeed "the Protestant era"--in the sense that societies everywhere, of all religious and irreligious persuasions, have appropriated just enough of the Protestant project to give them a desacralized cosmos susceptible to scientific analysis and technological exploitation.

And the idolatrous momentum carries further. In the midst of a nature as deprived of magicality--perhaps even of immediate visibility--as that which industrial urbanites know, more and more it is only the works of man that command admiration. The technological repertory of the artificial environment takes the place of the miraculous, like so many brilliantly fascinating figures against a drably alien ground. Machines, gadgets, devices, techniques monopolize attention and high esteem. They take our breath away as nothing else does and command our abject dependence. Consider the computers, the data banks, the great cybernated systems, the remembering machines and predicting machines, the controlling machines and deciding machines on which ever more of our daily survival depends... is it not with us as the prophet said of the heathen? 'For life he beseecheth that which is dead, And for aid he supplicateth that which hath least experience.' How is it again that Augustine described idolatry? 'Mankind tyrannized over by the work of his own hands.'

'Worship,' it may seem, is too strong a word for this relationship between man and his artificial environment. After all, worship is always conditioned by its object. The technological paraphernalia of our society, for all its prowess, may not carry religious contemplation far, not beyond a sort of low-grade amazement and routine applause. But... as far as it carries the mind is as far as we go. This is as great an exercise of worship as the prevailing Reality Principle permits. And we settle for it... most of us.

I think perhaps this is what damnation means: to live out one's days imprisoned in this idolatrous realm, the infinite universe which Pascal could only describe as 'a little prison cell.' But we have made a great discovery. Namely, that hell can be an interesting place! The world may indeed be God's dunghill; but there is much to be discovered and reclaimed therein. It can be worked. It can be made neat and productive. The life's energy of generations can be expended developing the thing, covering it over with concrete and plastic and sprawling supercities, finding faster ways to travel over and across its surfaces, consuming its substance and inventing substitutes for its depleted elements. In this busy way the time may be passed, and we shall get used to the idolatrous life. We shall make ourselves at home in it. Milton's fallen angels toyed with just such a strategy for enduring the unendurable. Significantly, it was Mammon, the demon of affluence, who devised this as a program for progress among the dammed.

### Chapter 5: A Dead Man's Eyes

#### *The Scientific Revolution: Idolatry and Triumphant*
It is a familiar human vice. We project the sins that reside in our hearts, locating them far off, in others, in adversaries whom we then assail and persecute for our own guilt. For centuries, the tendency toward idolatry in Judeo-Christian culture was externalized as scorn for pagan worship and the reproof of heresy. Still today, the discussion of idolatry would be thought of as an old religious subject matter, a dead controversy no longer part of our lives. At the superficial level of intellectual history, this is true enough. But within the evolution of consciousness, it is a different story. Idolatry has come into its own not within the mainstream religious life of the west, but as the psychic style belonging to a wholly new and domineering cultural enterprise--a 'New Philosophy' as Francis Bacon called seventeenth-century science.

Here is the subterranean link between the religion and science of the western world. The two are far from being antagonists--as one might suspect when one notices, especially in the Protestant societies, how smoothly science took its place in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries alongside the prevailing religion, and indeed what very devout men the early scientists were. There was a 'scientific revolution' during the age of Galileo, Kepler, Newton; but it was a revolution for which Christianity had long since been making ready the psychic ground. The melodramatic confrontation between Galileo and the Church (usually misread), often obscures the truth of the matter. What was most revolutionary about the revolution was not the struggle with Christian religious psychology, but with its overlay of inherited Aristotelian concepts. And what was the great obstacle that the pagan Aristotle posed? Simply that his study of nature preserved, if only as a weak residue, too much of the Old Gnosis, too much of the sense of nature alive and infused with purpose, nature aglow with seductively sensuous qualities. This was nature as it had been known in pagan worship--philosophically intellectualized by Aristotle, yet nonetheless a nature that concealed divinity never far below the surface of appearances. These remnants of a degraded pagan naturalism were the ancien régime that had to be overthrown by single vision before Christian society could produce its own peculiar natural philosophy. What science did was to extract from western man's religious psychology its well-developed idolatrous disposition and to elaborate the experience of nature that lay within it--at first with every expectation that this fresh worldview would serve piety, not detract from it.

#### *The Secret of Power-Knowledge*
Objective knowing gives us a new assembly line system of knowledge, one which relieves us of the necessity to integrate what we study into a moral or metaphysical context which will contribute to existential value. We no longer waste valuable research time and energy seeking for wisdom or depth, since these are qualities of the person. We are free to become specialists, and then, as impersonal researchers, we need only worry about being well informed (in our field), well bibliographied (in our field), and correct (in our field). By way of such microscopic professionalism, knowledge is indeed heaped enormously on all sides, until at last we begin to worry that there will not be libraries or data-retrieval systems capacious enough to contain the abundance.

We may shake our heads wondering how our ancestors managed to survive for a day knowing so much less than we do. But there is a more pertinent question. How are *we* to create a sane life in the midst of such an expanding universe of disintegrated research? What our competitive and careerist knowledge industry has produced already hopelessly exceeds our ability to make graceful use of it. The abundance does not cohere. Like the physicist's particle zoo, it increases as the focus tightens; but no enduring patterns emerge. The sum total of such information contributes pitifully little to the quality of life as it is lived day by day; yet it is the duty of no profession to give it existential validity. Beyond the boundaries of his discipline, each expert plays dumb. It does not occur to us that it may be as irresponsible to leave unintegrated knowledge laying about as to produce babies and abandon them on the nearest doorstep.

Finally, we begin to resemble the sad hero of Ionesco's play *The New Tenant*, overwhelmed and immobilized by a mountainous conglomeration of intellectual furniture. So it becomes our desperate project to program this slag heap of data points into the computers. The machines will know it all! The idea that culture is an adventure of the human spirit, to be carried on in fellowship for the good of our souls, vanishes from sight. "Thinking machines" (or at least"memory tapes") which merely counterfeit the formal surface of a real idea (but never feel its depth or rich ambiguity, never sense its personal resonance) become the electronic stitches of a cultural crazy quilt. And the thinking machines, of course, will be owned, programmed, and employed by the technocracy. They will not be *our* servants.
